This year’s Amazon Web Services conference, re:Invent 2024, confirmed a few trends we’ve been tracking in the artificial intelligence boom. These include massive changes in the cloud infrastructure landscape with investment of hundreds of billions of dollars in an AI infrastructure arms race, as well as the struggle of enterprises to find return on investment in AI.
This week, both of these trends had interesting twists. The week started off with the resignation of Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger, demonstrating what happens when you miss a huge market shift. Intel, even before Gelsinger took over, was poorly positioned in graphics processing units, the area that NVIDIA pioneered. But Gelsinger perhaps made things worse by focusing on an approach favoring the buildout of domestic and European manufacturing facilities and a foundry business, all based in part on government funding.
AWShad plenty of announcements in hardwareto demonstrate that it will stay in front of the AI arms race, including ensuring its supply of chips. In addition to buying chips from AI compute leaders NVIDIA and AMD, AWS has its own line of chips, including Graviton and Trainium. Here at re:Invent, it unveiled mass-scale AI clusters, complete with its own networking and interconnect technology, as well as general availability of its Trainium2 AI training chip.
LAS VEGAS, NEVADA - DECEMBER 3: Amazon Web Services (AWS) CEO Matt Garman delivers a keynote address... [+]during AWS re:Invent 2024, a conference hosted by Amazon Web Services, at The Venetian Las Vegas on December 3, 2024 in Las Vegas, Nevada. (Photo by Noah Berger/Getty Images for Amazon Web Services)
On the enterprise ROI front, I saw several examples of this in the re:Invent keynotes as well as the analyst conference, where companies as diverse as Apple, JP Morgan, The Hartford, Novo Nordisk, and others demonstrated how they are using AI to gain ROI in specific use cases.
Let’s dive into these two areas in more detail.
Walking around the re:Invent conference, which hosted 60,000 people, you can talk to anybody from cloud engineers to Fortune 500 CEOs. The conference is of course owned and operated by AWS, so it’s an annual tradition for AWS to launch a barrage of technology announcements—literally hundreds—that demonstrate why it’s still the leading cloud operator.
The question is, will AI help or hurt AWS in the long run? In addition to AWS competitors Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud, the AI boom has spawned a raft of AI-focused cloud providers, including Lambda and CoreWeave, the latter of which has achieved a valuation of tens of billions of dollars in just a few years.
AWS is of course determined not to let AI derail its leadership. Its announcements range from huge hardware projects to feature upgrades of its AI services SageMaker and Bedrock.
On the hardware front, AWS showed it has a diversification strategy to provide its own hardware, even though it buys from many suppliers, including NVIDIA. AWS announced general availability of Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) on Trn2 instances, which feature clusters of 16 Trn2 chips. And Trn2 can be scaled up using hardware clustering solutions. A separate Trn2 UltraServer, now in preview, features a cluster of 64 Trn2 chips across four Trn2 instances.
AWS CEO Matt Garman positioned it as a broadening of the market rather than as a competitive alternative to NVIDIA.
"NVIDIA is an incredibly important partner of ours. AMD is an incredible partner as well. Today it is true that the vast majority of workloads run on NVIDIA. We're so early where GenAI can be, that I think Trainium increases the size of the pie. It's not going to be at the expense [of others]."

The company is also planning a massive supercomputer named Project Rainier in partnership with Anthropic (which AWS has invested in), based on UltraServers. It's set to debut in 2025. Anthropic isn’t alone. Other Trn2customers includeDatabricks, Datadog, Ricoh, Hugging Face, and PyTorch.
It wouldn’t be re:Invent without lots of geeky upgrades to AWS services. AWS has rebranded its SageMaker ML service as SageMaker AI, which sports a bunch of enhancements designed to grease the wheels of ML-based analytics. These include the SageMaker HyperPod, whichcoordinates modeling workloads.
In a keynote talk at the conference this week, Swami Sivasubramanian, VP of AI and data at AWS, outlined a raft of new services that streamline model training and inferencing for enterprise customers.
“We’re seeing the convergence of big data, analytics, machine learning, and generative AI,” said Sivasubramanian. And AWS has built on a range of past successes to meet demand, he said.
In another example, the company’s other AI service, Bedrock, offers a range of large language models. This year featuresmulti-agent collaboration, which allows agents to coordinate across different tasks. Example: For a financial services firm, according to AWS’s online announcement, “specialized agents could coordinate to gather data, analyze trends, and provide actionable recommendations—working in parallel to improve response times and precision.” This feature is currently available in the US East (N. Virginia), US West (Oregon), and Europe (Ireland) AWS Regions.
Queue up the next topic: enterprise AI. The world is filled with chatter about whether AI can fulfill its promise in delivering ROI to the enterprise.
There are of course many skeptics, including Render founder and CEO Anurag Goel, who was also a former executive at Stripe. Render has a cloud automation platform that Goel says is being adopted by “hundreds of thousands of developers per month.” He told me that he hadn’t seen a huge demonstration of ROI at the conference.
“AWS announced a lot of services around AI but they lack a coherent end-to-end theme,” Goel told me in the hallway of the Venetian. “The business value and the ROI remains unclear.”
Despite some skepticism about the AI endgame, some attendees said there has been a shift in thinking from “god” products to more tactical technology using AI. Adam Jacob, cofounder and CEO of System Initiative, told me the new thinking embodies a more tactical, focused approach he refers to as “micro AI.”
“As an industry, we started out by thinking, ‘We're going to have a single god robot that we just pump all the exabytes of data to and we just let the god machine sort it out.’ We're learning that that creates a terrible user experience and is incredibly hard to track and secure. Instead, we're starting to build micro AI experiences that form a series of small experiences that build up to really compelling big ones."
The case for micro AI makes sense. Generalized AI is difficult and has key challenges such as accuracy, data security, and data provenance. But if you can focus on specific solutions with an AI tool, you might have a better shot at ROI gratification.
In its analyst conference, AWS did a good job of presenting ROI examples from customers, which was a noticeable change from last year, when the market was still riding the pink cloud of AI hype.
In its briefing sessions for industry analysts, AWS had examples of compelling ROI-driven case studies. Companies presenting included Apple, JP Morgan, The Hartford, Merck, New York Life, and Novo Nordisk, among others.
Louise Lind Skov, head of content digitalisation with Danish pharmaceutical giant Novo Nordisk. showed how the company reduced the time to create regulatory documentation from two months to several minutes by building its own AI-driven tool on AWS, which it calls NovoScribe.
“From a medical writing perspective, this would have required thousands of hours of work,” said Skov.
NovoScribe seems to be a great example of micro AI. By focusing on a specific use case and process, Novo Nordisk was able to deliver specific efficiencies.
This will be a big theme going forward as the AI wave takes a circuitous path to technology nirvana. Nobody has a god AI app yet, but there are certainly many tools available to solve everyday problems and deliver tangible results in focused areas.

One Community. Many Voices. Create a free account to share your thoughts.
Our community is about connecting people through open and thoughtful conversations. We want our readers to share their views and exchange ideas and facts in a safe space.
In order to do so, please follow the posting rules in our site'sTerms of Service.We've summarized some of those key rules below. Simply put, keep it civil.
Your post will be rejected if we notice that it seems to contain:
User accounts will be blocked if we notice or believe that users are engaged in:
So, how can you be a power user?
Thanks for reading our community guidelines.  Please read the full list of posting rules found in our site'sTerms of Service.